Influence of Ring Contraction on the Electronic Structure of Nickel Tetrapyrrole Complexes: Corrole vs Porphyrin
ECS JSolidStateSciTechnol. 2020
The inﬂuence of the contracted corrole macrocycle, in comparison to the larger porphyrin macrocycle, on the electronic structure of nickel was studied with X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, UPS) and near-edge X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. Synthesis and in situ characterization of the Ni complexes of octaethylporphyrin (NiOEP) and hexaethyldimethylcorrole (NiHEDMC) were performed in ultra-high vacuum. XPS and NEXAFS spectra reveal a +2 oxidation state and a low-spin d8 electron conﬁguration of Ni in both complexes, despite the formal trianionic nature of the corrole ligand. UPS, in combination with DFT calculations, support the electronic structure of a Ni(II) corrole with a π-radical character of the ligand. The NEXAFS spectra also reveal differences in the valence electronic structure, which are attributed to the size mismatch between the small Ni(II) center and the larger central cavity of NiOEP. Analysis of the gas-phase structures shows that the Ni−N bonds in NiOEP are 4%–6% longer than those in NiHEDMC, even when NiOEP adopts a rufﬂed conformation. The individual interactions that constitute the Ni−ligand bond are altogether stronger in the corrole complex, according to bonding analysis within the energy decomposition analysis and the natural orbitals for chemical valence theory ( EDA - NOCV ).
ADF NOCV EDA

Combined XPS and DFT investigation of the adsorption modes of methyl enol ether functionalized cyclooctyne on Si(001)
ChemPhysChem 2021
The reaction of methyl enol ether functionalized cyclooctyne on additional reaction of the enol ether group; the relative the Si(001) surface was investigated by means of X-ray contribution of this configuration to the total coverage depends photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and DFT on substrate temperature and coverage. Further configurations (DFT). Three different groups of final states were identified; all include enol ether groups which reacted on the silicon surface of them bind on Si(001) via the strained triple bond of either via ether cleavage or enol ether groups which trans- cyclooctyne but they differ in the configuration of the methyl formed on the surface into a carbonyl group. enol ether group. The majority of molecules adsorbs without
HSE06-D3

Efficient hierarchical models for reactivity of organic layers on semiconductor surfaces
JComputChem. 2021
Computational modeling of organic interface formation on semiconductors poses a challenge to a DFT-based description due to structural and chemical complexity. A hierarchical approach is presented, where parts of the interface are successively removed in order to increase computational efficiency while maintaining the necessary accuracy. First, a benchmark is performed to probe the validity of this approach for three model reactions and five dispersion corrected density functionals. Reaction energies are generally well reproduced by generalized gra- dient approximation-type functionals but accurate reaction barriers require the use of hybrid functionals. Best performance is found for the model system that does not explicitly consider the substrate but includes its templating effects. Finally, this efficient model is used to provide coverage dependent reaction energies and suggest synthetic principles for the prevention of unwanted growth termination reactions for organic layers on semiconductor surfaces.
DFT, hybrid organic–inorganic materials, interfaces, model hierarchy, semiconductor functionalization
hierarchical approach

Complementary Base Lowers the Barrier in SuFEx Click Chemistry for Primary Amine Nucleophiles
ACS Omega 2020
The sulfur(VI) ﬂuoride exchange (SuFEx) reaction is an emerging scheme for connecting molecular building blocks. Due to its broad functional group tolerance and rather stable resulting linkage, it is seeing rapid adoption in various ﬁelds of chemistry. Still, to date the reaction mechanism is poorly understood, which hampers further development. Here, we show that the mechanism of the SuFEx reaction for the prototypical example of methanesulfonyl ﬂuoride reacting with methylamine can be understood as an SN2-type reaction. By analyzing the reaction path with the help of DFT in vacuo and under consideration of solvent and co-reactant inﬂuence, we identify the often used complementary base as a crucial ingredient to lower the reaction barrier signiﬁcantly by increasing the nucleophilicity of the primary amine. With the help of energy decomposition analysis at the transition state structures, we quantify the underlying stereoelectronic effects and propose new avenues for experimental exploration of the potential of SuFEx chemistry. Click Chemistry Click Chemistry Click Chemistry
Click chemistry EDA VASP-5.4.4 PBE-D3 NOCV NOCV NOCV NOCV EDA EDA EDA

Organic Functionalization at the Si(001) Dimer Vacancy Defect-Structure, Bonding, and Reactivity
JPhysChem. C 2021
In this DFT study, the inﬂuence of the bonded dimer vacancy (DV) on the reactivity of the Si(001) surface is investigated. To this end, electronic and structural properties of the defect are analyzed. Band structure calculations reveal a higher-lying valence band which would suggest increased reactivity. However, the opposite is found when organic molecules for interface formation (acetylene, ethylene, and cyclooctyne) are adsorbed at the defect. Signiﬁcant reaction barriers have to be overcome in order to form bonds with defect atoms, while adsorption on the pristine surface is mostly direct. This suggests the presence of a rather weak Si−Si bond across the defect which must be dissociated before organic adsorbates can react. A rich adsorption and reaction network is found in addition to the structures known from the pristine surface. All three investigated adsorbates show diﬀerent bonding characteristics. For acetylene and ethylene, the preferred thermodynamic sink is the insertion into the defect, with the latter molecule even dissociating. Bulky cyclooctyne on the other hand avoids reaction with the defect due to steric demands imposed by the small defect cavity. The DV has no effect on the reactivity of neighboring dimers. A combination of defect creation and hydrogen-precoverage could be a promising approach for selective surface functionalization. We thus show the inﬂuence of a nonideal surface on organic functionalization and interface build-up reactions for a prototypical interface.
VASP-5.4.4 NOCV PBE DFT-D3 EDA PBE-D3 DV Acetylene and Cyclooctyne
Electronic Structure of the DV Defect. Next, the electronic structure of the DV (Figure 4) in reciprocal (band DV

On-Surface Formation of a Transient Corrole Radical and Aromaticity-Driven Interfacial Electron Transfer
JPhysChem. C 2020
Corroles on metal surfaces show substantial reactivity and aromaticity-driven interfacial electron transfer of their transient σ/π-radicals. These effects are much more pronounced than for the closely related porphyrins, as has been demonstrated by using an octaalkylcorrole (2,3,8,12,17,18-hexaethyl-7,13-dimethylcorrole, 3H-HEDMC) and its singly N-H dehydrogenated product 2H-HEDMC on a Ag(111) surface through a combination of experimental and theoretical methods. 3H-HEDMC assumes a nonplanar adsorption geometry caused by intramolecular steric repulsion between the three N-H hydrogen atoms. One of the N-H bonds is tilted far out of the molecular plane and points toward the surface. This N-H bond undergoes surface-catalyzed and entropy-driven homolytic scission already below 230 K, resulting in the formation of planar, strain-relieved 2H-HEDMC as a formal π-radical with a 17π-electron conjugation path. The experimental N-H bond scission barrier of 74 kJ/mol agrees well with theory. 2H-HEDMC engages in transfer of electron density from the surface to the molecule. The additional electron density quenches the radical spin and leads to aromatic stabilization because it inﬂuences the electronic structure toward an aromatic 18π-electron conjugation path. Our study demonstrates that aromaticity considerations are useful to rationalize and predict interfacial electron transfer effects, which play an important role in organic electronics, electrocatalysis, and sensors.
Charge density diﬀerence plots with an isosurface value of 0.001 e/A3 of (a) 3H-C, (b) 2H-C, and (c) 2H-P on Ag(111).
Figure 8. Spin densities (isosurface value = 0.001e/A3) of (a) gas-phase 2H-C and (b) 2H-C on Ag(111), indicating that the spin at the molecule is almost completely quenched in the adsorbed state. (c) Residual delocalized spin density of adsorbed 2H-C visible with an extremely low isosurface value of 5 × 10−8e/A3. Green and red regions represent excess of α- or β-spin, respectively.
Reaction energy proﬁle of the dissociation of the N-H bond of 3H-HEDMC
three 18π systems: the 3H-corrole, the 2H-corrole anion, and the adsorbed 2H-corrole. Further bond length values are shown in. For comparison of the two gas-phase species, the 2H-corrole radical and the anion, with the adsorbed 2H-corrole, the bond lengths diﬀerences are shown

Adsorption of Methyl-Substituted Benzylazide on Si(001): Reaction Channels and Final Conﬁgurations
JPhysChem. C 2020
The reaction of a methyl-substituted benzylazide on the Si(001) surface was investigated by means of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and DFT-based computations. It was found that the reaction takes place via an intermediate state, which could be experimentally observed at low temperatures. XPS analysis showed that at temperatures of 150 K and above, the azide further reacts on the silicon surface via abstraction of N2. The ﬁnal state sees the remaining nitrogen atom of the adsorbate binding covalently to the surface. In the STM images, this ﬁnal state is associated with two diﬀerent adsorption conﬁgurations. In comparison with DFT calculations, these two conﬁgurations are assigned to the molecule being bound via the nitrogen atom only and to a conﬁguration with the molecule bound to the substrate via the nitrogen atom and carbon ring simultaneously.
Energies computed with HSE06-D3 and thermodynamic correction terms using PBE-D3. VASP-5.4.4
